# Discussion Seminar: Philosophy of Programming Languages

## Organizers

Yi Dai, Lev Lamberov, Klaus Ostermann

## Overview

We have learned concepts and properties of programming languages.  Yet that is
_not_ the whole picture.  Programming languages, as an artifct for describing
information processing, are situated in a larger background that involves
humans, machines and other real-world objects.  When looking at this bigger
picture, a lot of interesting questions about them emerge: What is the
_nature_ of their meaning?  How do they reach _out_ to the world and _in_ to
our mind?  How do they interact with their community?  What are aesthetic and
ethic considerations about them?  These questions go beyond the reach of
computer science and require the attendance of philosophy.

This discussion seminar is a journey through philosophical investigations into
these questions raised about programming languages.  There may be no definite
answers to them.  However, it is our wish that, through this journey, we will
gain not only a broader view of programming languages from a philosophical
perspective but also the ability to consider and evaluate programming
languages philosophically.

## Syllabus

### Meeting Time

Every Wednesday, 13:00 ~ 15:00

### Meeting Place

SR V D5

### Prerequisites

It is _recommended_ that you take a course on programming languages (e.g.,
[Programming Languages and
Types](http://www.uni-marburg.de/fb12/ps/teaching/ws13/plt)) before
participating in this discussion seminar.  If you do not and are anyway
interested, you are of course welcome.  But be aware that you may need to read
some (not much) extra material in case you lack the background.

_No_ philosophical background is required.  But if you have, it will of course
help.

### Organization

This is a weekly _discussion seminar_.  In each week's meeting (except the
first which will be a kickoff introduction), one of you will present _an_
article announced in the previous week and afterwards lead a discussion about
it involving all attendants.  All of you are required to read the article and
submit a _summary_ of it _24 hours before_ each week's meeting.  The one who
volunteers to be the leader of that week's meeting of course need also prepare
for presentation and moderation.

### Topics and Articles

#### Meaning and Reference

- Brian Cantwell Smith, [Linguistic And Computational
  Semantics](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=E4BA8A64DD1DE5D80A58ED3D3EB5992F?doi=10.1.1.14.8886&rep=rep1&type=pdf),
  1982

- Brian Cantwell Smith, [The Limits of
  Correctness](https://www.student.cs.uwaterloo.ca/~cs492/11public_html/p18-smith.pdf),
  1985

- Brian Cantwell Smith, [Two Lessons of
  Logic](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-8640.1987.tb00206.x/pdf), 1987

- Graham White, [The Philosophy of Computer
  Languages](Articles/Graham-White_ThePhilosophyOfComputerLanguages_2004.pdf), 2004

- Raymond Turner, [Understanding Programming
  Languages](http://www.springerlink.com/content/h391647n75036h4k/), 2007

- Raymond Turner, Amnon H. Eden, [Towards a Programming Language
  Ontology](http://www.eden-study.org/articles/2007/towards-pl-ontology_dodigstuart.pdf),
  2007

- Raymond Turner, [The Meaning of Programming
  Languages](http://cswww.essex.ac.uk/staff/turnr/Mypapers/v09n1_Computers.pdf), 2009

#### Cognition

- Tom Ormelrod, [Human Cognition and
  Programming](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/teaching/1011/R201/ppig-book/ch1-4.pdf), 1990

- Garry L. White, [A Theory of the Relationships between Cognitive
  Requirements of Computer Programming Languages and Programmersâ€™ Cognitive
  Characteristics](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.126.4257&rep=rep1&type=pdf),
  2002

#### Social Interaction

- Leo A. Meyerovich, Ariel Rabkin, [Socio-PLT: Principles for Programming
  Language
  Adoption](http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~asrabkin/papers/onward12.pdf), 2012

- Leo A. Meyerovich, Ariel Rabkin, [Empirical Analysis of Programming Language
  Adoption](http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/~lmeyerov/projects/socioplt/papers/adoptquant.pdf),
  2013

#### Aesthetics

- Bruce J. MacLennan, ["Who Cares About Elegance?" The Role of Aesthetics in
  Programming Language
  Design](http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.52.7855&rep=rep1&type=pdf),
  1997

- Michael Mateas, Nick Montfort, [A Box, Darkly: Obfuscation, Weird Languages,
  and Code
  Aesthetics](http://eprints.cscsarchive.org/144/1/10.1.1.94.3707.pdf), 2005

#### Ethics

- (Linda McIver, Damian Conway, [Seven Deadly Sins of Introductory Programming
  Language
  Design](http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~damian/papers/PDF/SevenDeadlySins.pdf),
  1992)

- Shane Markstrum, [Staking Claims: A History of Programming Language Design
  Claims and
  Evidence](http://ecs.victoria.ac.nz/foswiki/pub/Events/PLATEAU/2010Program/plateau10-markstrum.pdf),
  2010

------

## Resources

- [Philosophy of Programming Languages](http://pcs.essex.ac.uk/pls.html)

- [Classic Papers in Programming Languages and
  Logic](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~crary/819-f09/)

- [Topics in Programming Languages: A Philosophical Analysis Through the Case
  of
  Prolog](http://www.chartridgebooksoxford.com/index.php/current-titles?id=40)

- [If Philosophers Were
  Programmers](http://developeronline.blogspot.de/2009/04/if-philosophers-were-programmers.html)

- [Ancient Philosophy And Programming
  Languages](http://www.perlmonks.org/?node_id=349593)

- [Existential Programming](http://www.existentialprogramming.com/)

- [How the Ancient Greeks Invented
  Programming](http://www.infoq.com/presentations/Philosophy-Programming)

- [Philosophy of Computer Science](http://pcs.essex.ac.uk/index.html)

- [The Philosophy of Computer
  Science](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/computer-science/)

- [Plato and Object Oriented Programming](http://www.richardfarrar.com/plato-and-object-oriented-programming/)

